# Optimization 24hrElectricityGrid
 Solving a Unit Commitment (electricity generator scheduling) problem using linear programming.

# University of Galway
## Optimization (CT5141) - Assignment
## James McDermott

## Problem Formulation

Our challenge is to formulate two separate linear programming problems. The first program's objective ($LP_1$) is to minimise the cost of generating electricity while meeting the hourly demand of customers. The second program's objective ($LP_2$) is to minimise the $CO_2$ output of generating electricity while meeting the hourly demand of customers. 

The decision variables are $X_{ij}$, the amount of electricity to generate during hour $i$ of the day from generator $j$. We have 12 generators and 24 hours in a day. Therefore, we will have $12 \times 24 = 288$ decision variables.

The objective function for $LP_1$ is the **total cost ($C$)** of electricity generation over a full day (24 hours). The objective function which we want to minimise can be written as:

$$
C = \sum^{24}_{i=1} \left[ 1.4(X_{i1} + X_{i2} + X_{i3} + X_{i4}) + 4.4(X_{i5} + X_{i6} + X_{i7}) + 9.1X_{i8} + 9.5X_{i9} + 5.4(X_{i10} + X_{i11} + X_{i12}) \right] 
$$

The objective function for $LP_2$ is the **total $CO_2$ output ($CO2$)** of electricity generation over a full day (24 hours). The objective function which we want to minimise can be written as:

$$
CO2 = \sum^{24}_{i=1} \left[ 0.024(X_{i1} + X_{i2} + X_{i3} + X_{i4}) + 0.82(X_{i5} + X_{i6} + X_{i7}) + 0.49X_{i8} + 0.5X_{i9} \right]
$$

The constraints for both problems are the same. The constraints for $LP_1$ and $LP_2$ are given as follows,

Let,

- $d_i$ be the hourly demand for electricity.
- $L_{ij}$ is the lower bound on electricity generation for a generator $j$ during hour $i$.
- $ U_{ij}$ is the upper bound.
- $s_i$ be the solar curve value at a given hour.

Then, our constraints can be expressed as:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum^{12}_{j=1} X_{ij} &= d_i \ \forall \  i & demand \\
X_{ij} &= X_{1j}, \  for \  j \in \{ 4, 5, 6 \} \  \forall \  i > 1 & solid \  fuel \  generators \\
X_{ij} &\leq U_{ij}, \  for \  j \in \{1, 2, \ldots, 9\}  \ \forall \  i & upper \  bound \\
X_{ij} &\leq s_i U_{ij} \  for \  j \in \{10, 11, 12\} \  \forall \  i & solar \  curve \\
X_{ij} &\geq L_{ij}  \ \forall \  i & lower \  bound
\end{aligned}
$$

#### Application of Linear Programming
Linear programming is appropriate for this problem as the constraints and objective function are linear in form (i.e They can be expressed as linear combinations of decision variables and corresponding coefficients).

#### Implementation

We instantiate the `linearProg` class by passing in the data and creating a  _pywraplp.Solver_ object. We then add the decision variables and constraints to the _Solver_ by calling the `add_vars_and_constr` function. Once the problem is set up, we can call the `obj_fun` function and pass it a list of the objective function coefficients we wish to use (corresponding to the cost and $CO_2$ objectives) and finally call the `solve` function to get the optimal values of the decision variables for each  minimisation objective. The values are returned in a Pandas dataframe with columns representing the generators and rows representing the hours of the day.


The optimal solution for both the LP optimization problems are shown in the table below.

- The optimal objective function value for cost minimisation is €$157436.10$.
- The optimal objective function value for $CO_2$ minimisation is $18753.42$.


### Multiple Equal Optima

By changing the values of variables that have the same coefficients in the objective function and are not on their bounds, we can find different sets of decision variables that have the same optimal objective function values. 

For example in $LP_1$, the amount of electricity generated by solar generators from 11:00 to 12:00 ($i=12$) is $X_{10} = 0$, $X_{11} = 0$, $X_{12} = 23$, If we compare the generators outputs to their bounds, we see that $X_{10}$ and $X_{11}$ are on their lower bound while $X_{12}$ falls inbetween its upper and lower bounds. Since solar generators $X_{10}$ and $X_{11}$ are on their lower bounds, we can increase their value without moving outside of our bounds. Similarly, with solar generator $X_{12}$, we can increase or decrease its output without moving outide of its bounds. Only changing the output of one of the solar generators would change the objective function value as well as direspecting our demand constraint, but if we decrease the output from solar generator $X_{12}$ by say 2 units and increase solar generator $X_{11}$ by 2 units, we keep the objective value constant since both generators have the same coefficient in the objective function and we ensure that all of our demand constraints are met as we are still producing the same amount of electricity. Therefore, we have a different set of decision variables that lead to the same objective function value and meet all of our constraints, hence mutiple equal optima. 